གྲིམས་ཀྱིས་སྒྲིམ་ལ་ལྷོད་ཀྱིས་གློད|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 16: 'This means without distraction, but very relaxed at the same time.' DKR. Furthermore, at first it is necessary to rein in the wild thoughts to achieve sustained calm (ལྷག་མཐོང), then one has to relax the mind to allow the expansion of profound insight (ཞི་གནས).'
ལམ་དུ་འཁྱེར་བ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 40: 'lit. to take on the path. This means using all situations in daily life as part of the practice. If Gelong Thangpa had taken his negative thoughts on the path by using love as the antidote to aggression, for example, or by seeing the empty nature of the thought as soon as it arose, it would not have led to any harm.'
རྐྱེན|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 41: 'circumstances. The auxiliary cause which allows the deep cause (རྒྱུ) to produce its effect. If someone dies in an accident, for instance, the accident itself, the circumstances of that death, are the rkyen, and the རྒྱུ, the deep cause, is a negative action performed in the past, of which death is the karmic result.'
འདུ་ཤེས་མེད་པ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 23: 'AT without perception. We have followed the explanation of DKR: 'The gods without perception have created a blankness in their minds and perceive nothing, as in the state of deep sleep without dreams.''
གྱུར་དུག|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 42: 'in Tibetan medicine, this expression refers to foods which are healthy in themselves, but which become toxic or indigestible when eaten in combination with certain other foods.'
ཤ་སྒྲེན|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 43: 'ཤ་སྒྲེན means meat which is excessively old but not necessarily rotten. Food can be stored for long periods of time in Tibet because of the very particular climatic conditions.'
དཀོར་ཟ་བ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 49: 'usually means using funds donated by the faithful, with the particular sense of using them improperly. Sometimes it refers to the abuse of collective possessions, such as the wealth of a nation, by those in a position of power.'
ལས་ཀྱི་རླུང|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 56: 'the force of previous actions which propels the whole process of samsara.'
ལས་ཀྱི་ས་པ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 60: 'a place where the force of karma is more powerful and its effects are felt more strongly and, in certain cases, sooner. Of the four continents in the universe of traditional cosmology, it is especially inJambudvipa that actions produce strong effects, and in which individual experiences are more variable. The inhabitants of the other continents experience the results of past actions, for the most part, rather than creating new causes. Their experiences and lifespans are more fixed.'
ལས་སུ་འཆར་བ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 67: 'We have received a number of different explanations of this expression. We have translated it according to the interpretation of DKR as being the equivalent of ལས་སུ་རུང་བ, suitable or workable.'
དཀོར་ནག་པོ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 74: 'Because of the very sacredness of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, the misuse of offerings made to them has especially heavy karmic consequences. Here particular reference is made to the offerings of the faithful for rituals performed for the dead, the sick, etc.'
ཐར་པ་དང་གྲོལ་བ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 75: 'We have translated these two terms here as liberation and freedom, nearly synonymous in English. PWR explains the difference in this context: liberation (ཐར་པ) is from samsara, especially the lower realms, while freedom (གྲོལ་བ) is from all the obstacles to omniscience, or enlightenment. In other contexts, ཐར་པ can cover both of these meanings, as in Chapter Six.
སེང་ལྡེང|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 84: 'is a hardwood, the catechu tree Acacia catechu, found all over northern India, Nepal and the valleys of Tibet.'
སྲིད་པ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 96: 'its root meaning is 'possibility,' whatever can transform into anything else. Thus it represents all the concepts which we project onto reality and which become the illusory world that we perceive. So it can be translated as: becoming, existence, sarilsira, the world.'
ནོར་རྫས|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 99: 'literally, 'material wealth.' We have often translated this term (and ནོར on its own) as 'money,' although it could also mean anything precious and valuable, not specifically some form of currency.
གྱང་རིམ་གསུམ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 101: ''three courses of a day wall,' about three metres. In many parts of Tibet, the walls of houses were built of day (གྱང་རིམ), which was compacted while wet between parallel wooden forms laid along the line of the wall, and allowed to dry. The forms would then be moved up to hold the next course (གྱང) of day. The wooden boards used as forms were generally about a metre in width. The term རིམ or གྱང was often used as a rough measure of the depth of snow.'
ཚོགས་ཞིང|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 112: ''the field (i.e. object) for accumulating merit through prostrations, offerings and prayers.' DICf. Because of the enlightened qualitites of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, the effect of any positive action directed towards them has enormous power. See also glossary for field of merit.'
འཁར་གསིལ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 117: 'A monk's staff, called ལྷུང་བཟེད, literally 'ringing staff,' consists of a shaft of wood and iron surmounted by two sriipas; below the uppermost hang four wheels and twelve metal rings, whose jangling sound signals the monk's presence. The alms-bowl, usually of metal, is called འཁར་གསིལ, literally 'that which holds what falls'.'
ལྷུང་བཟེད|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 117: 'A monk's staff, called ལྷུང་བཟེད, literally 'ringing staff,' consists of a shaft of wood and iron surmounted by two sriipas; below the uppermost hang four wheels and twelve metal rings, whose jangling sound signals the monk's presence. The alms-bowl, usually of metal, is called འཁར་གསིལ, literally 'that which holds what falls'.'
རུས་པ་ཅན|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 124: 'literally meaning 'bony,' referring here to the expression མྱིང་རུས, lit. 'a bone in the heart,' meaning bold determination and the courage never to give up.'
ཞེ་སྡང་རང་མཚན་པ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 128: 'Real anger (zhe sdang rang mtshan pa) is a negative emotion based on the dualistic notion of 'I' and 'other.' It should be distinguished from the expression of anger displayed by beings who are free from such notions and whose every action is based on compassion for all beings. This wrathful display is a powerful method to help those who are not susceptible to a peaceful approach.'
རྣམ་སྣང་ཆོས་བདུན|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 161: 'Seven point posture of Vairocana - རྣམ་སྣང་ཆོས་བདུན, the seven points of the ideal meditation posture: legs crossed in the vajra posture, back straight, hands in the gesture of meditation, eyes gazing in the direction of the tip of the nose, chin slightly tucked in, shoulders well apart 'like a vulture's wings,' and the tip of the tongue touching the palate.'
དག་པ་དྲན་པ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 180: 'This Tibetan expression literally means 'remembering the purity.' It refers to the fact that every element of visualization is not a mere image but has a particular meaning, and it is important to be aware of this significance as one does the practice. The precise way in which the elements of this practice relate to the four powers is explained a few paragraphs later. Although here we are only dealing with the preliminary practice, many points mentioned in this chapter are useful for the main practice of the generation and perfection phases.'
སྟོན་པ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 182: 'This common epithet of the Buddha literally means 'revealer,' and signifies the teacher who taught the Dharma for the first time in our kalpa and world. Vajrasanva is the first teacher of many traditions of the Vajrayana in the same way as the Buddha Sakyamuni is the originator of the vehicle of characteristics.'
བསྐྱེད་རིམ་གསལ་འདེབས|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 191: 'the description of the images to be visualized and the different processes of the meditation is recited before proceeding to the actual recitation of the manna. This is the standard structure of the ritual texts used for the sadhana (སྒྲུབ་ཐབས, lit. means of accomplishment) of any deity. Such texts are used not only for ceremonies in a group for particular purposes, but also for personal practice.'
བསགས་སྦྱང་རང་སར་དག་ཀྱང|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 201: 'lit. 'even when accumulation and purification are pure in their own place.''
མི་མཇེད་འིཨིག་རྟེན|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 210: 'According to the explanation of DKR which implies another possible spelling (མི་འབྱེད, undivided) in this universe the emotions are so strong that beings are never separate from them.'
བཀོད་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ལྔ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 211: 'lit. the five great arrangements. These are the Buddhafields of the Buddhas of the five families.'
ཞལ་ཟས|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 214: 'an honorific term for food. In this case an offering of food represented by a type of torma which bears this name.'
མ་ཅིག་ཀབྲོ་མ་ནག་མོ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 220: 'Skt. Krodhakali.'
དཔལ་མགོན་བདུན་ཅུ་རྩ་ལྔ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 224: 'some of the most famous Dharma-protectors of Tibet. They are considered to be emanations of Mahakala.'
སྒྱུ་མ་ངལ་གསོ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 238: 'the third work in Longchenpa's Trilogy of Rest, ngal gso skor gsum. Longchenpa himself explains that the title can be taken not only as 'finding rest from illusion,' but also as 'finding rest in illusion,'-illusion in the latter case being understood as referring to the view of everything as being like a magical display without any inherent reality.'
བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 243: 'the unconventional lifestyle adopted by the most advanced practitioners as a means of perfecting their confidence in the view. 'Having transcended ordinary activities, engaging in extraordinary ones.' DICT'
ཤེས་བྱ་བུམ་འཇུག|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 270: 'one of the instructions on the yoga of sleep found in the Great Perfection teachings.'
སྤངས་རྟོགས|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 276: 'the qualities of a Buddha-freedom from all obscurations and tendencies, and realization of the two kinds of knowledge-knowing all that there is to know and knowing the nature of everything.'
མདོ་དགོངས་འདུས|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 280: 'also known as འདུས་པ་མདོ. Although it is called a sutra, this text is in fact one of the four root tantras of Anuyoga. It was written down in molten beryl by the raksasa Matyaupayika.'
རྒྱུད་གསང་བའི་སྙིང་པོ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 281: 'Skt. Guhyagarbha, called here the Glorious Secret Tantra (དཔལ་གསང་བའི་རྒྱུད).'
དཔལ་གསང་བའི་རྒྱུད|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 281: 'དཔལ་གསང་བའི་རྒྱུད, Skt. Guhyagarbha, called here the Glorious Secret Tantra (རྒྱུད་གསང་བའི་སྙིང་པོ).'
རྒྱལ་ཐབས་སྤྱི་ལུགས|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 284: 'empowerment without any ritual or visible process, simply the complete and instantaneous transfer of enlightened realization from mind to mind. རྒྱལ་ཐབས, 'pouring,' refers to this direct transfer, while སྤྱི་ལུགས, the 'conquerors' means,' can be understood as referring to Buddhahood and also, metaphorically, to the sovereignty conferred, as by a king to his heir.'
མདོ་སྡེ་ཟ་མ་ཏོག་བཀོད་པ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 291: '(Skt. Aryakarandavyuha sutra), a scripture on Avalokitesvara to be found in the Mani Kahbum of Songtsen Campo.'
དཔང་སྐོང་ཕྱག་བརྒྱ་པའི་མདོ|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 292: 'Skt. Saksipuranasudrakanama sutra'
གནམ་ཆོས|According to Words of My Perfect Teacher (Padmakara), fn 324: 'The Namcho or Sky Doctrines is a thirteen-volume collection of teachings received in visions by the prolific treasure-discoverer Mingyur Dorje, who was born in 1645 and died in 1668 at the age of only twenty-three. The Namcho lineage is one of the principal practice traditions of the Nyingrna monasteries of Palyul and Kathok in Eastern Tibet.'